---
# Please do not edit this file directly; it is auto generated.
# Instead, please edit 01-intro-to-r.md in _episodes_rmd/
title: "Introduction to R"
teaching: 30
exercises: 10
questions:
- "FIXME"
objectives: 
- "FIXME"
keypoints:
- "FIXME"
source: Rmd
---




## Read in data in R

First we load a package to help us read Excel files:

~~~
library(readxl)
~~~
{: .language-r}

In order to do useful and interesting things, we need to assign _values_ to
_objects_. To create an object, we need to give it a name followed by the
assignment operator `<-`, and the value we want to give it.

The value in this case, is the result of reading an Excel file:





~~~
flightdata <- read_excel("data/flightdata.xlsx")
~~~
{: .language-r}

`<-` is the assignment operator. It assigns values on the right to objects on
the left. So, after executing `x <- read_excel("data/flightdata.xlsx")`, 
the value of `x` is `read_excel("data/flightdata.xlsx")`. The arrow can
be read as read_excel("data/flightdata.xlsx") **goes into** `x`.  For historical reasons, you can also use `=`
for assignments, but not in every context.

In RStudio, typing <kbd>Alt</kbd> + <kbd>-</kbd> (push <kbd>Alt</kbd> at the
same time as the <kbd>-</kbd> key) will write `<- ` in a single keystroke in a
PC, while typing <kbd>Option</kbd> + <kbd>-</kbd> (push <kbd>Option</kbd> at the
same time as the <kbd>-</kbd> key) does the same in a Mac.

Objects can be given any name such as `x`, `current_temperature`, or
`subject_id`. You want your object names to be explicit and not too long. They
cannot start with a number (`2x` is not valid, but `x2` is). R is case sensitive
(e.g., `age` is different from `Age`). There are some names that
cannot be used because they are the names of fundamental objects in R (e.g.,
`if`, `else`, `for`, see
[here](https://stat.ethz.ch/R-manual/R-devel/library/base/html/Reserved.html)
for a complete list). In general, even if it's allowed, it's best to not use
them (e.g., `c`, `T`, `mean`, `data`, `df`, `weights`). If in
doubt, check the help to see if the name is already in use. It's also best to
avoid dots (`.`) within an object name as in `my.dataset`. There are many
objects in R with dots in their names for historical reasons, but because dots
have a special meaning in R (for methods) and other programming languages, it's
best to avoid them. It is also recommended to use nouns for object names, and
verbs for function names. It's important to be consistent in the styling of your
code (where you put spaces, how you name objects, etc.). Using a consistent
coding style makes your code clearer to read for your future self and your
collaborators. In R, three popular style guides are
[Google's](https://google.github.io/styleguide/Rguide.xml), [Jean
Fan's](http://jef.works/R-style-guide/) and the
[tidyverse's](http://style.tidyverse.org/). The tidyverse's is very
comprehensive and may seem overwhelming at first. You can install the
[**`lintr`**](https://github.com/jimhester/lintr) package to automatically check
for issues in the styling of your code.

> ## Objects vs. variables
>
> What are known as `objects` in `R` are known as `variables` in many other
> programming languages. Depending on the context, `object` and `variable` can
> have drastically different meanings. However, in this lesson, the two words
> are used synonymously. For more information see:
> [https://cran.r-project.org/doc/manuals/r-release/R-lang.html#Objects](https://cran.r-project.org/doc/manuals/r-release/R-lang.html#Objects)
{: .callout}

# Taking a look at the data


~~~
Error in flightdata %>% sample_frac(0.005) %>% view(): could not find function "%>%"
~~~
{: .error}

The %>% is a pipe. It takes whatever is on the left hand side of it, and 
passes it to whatever is on the right hand side. 

In this case it is the function sample_frac() that takes the input, flightdata,
and returns a random fraction of the data. 0.005 in this case. 

We write the fraction we want as an argument to the function.

We do that because the data is pretty large. We then use a second pipe to 
pass that to the view() function, that shows us the data in a nice format that
is easier to read.

Here we are going to take a look at the data structure.

## Let us make a plot


~~~
flightdata %>% 
  sample_frac(.005) %>% 
  ggplot(mapping = aes( x = dep_delay, y = arr_delay)) +
  geom_point()
~~~
{: .language-r}



~~~
Error in flightdata %>% sample_frac(0.005) %>% ggplot(mapping = aes(x = dep_delay, : could not find function "%>%"
~~~
{: .error}

Note that the pipe is not a pipe in plots. Its a +.

Mapping denotes which values from the data, should be mapped to something in 
the plot. The "somethings" depends on the type of plot. We are making a 
scatter plot, using geom_point, because we are plotting points. They have
a minimum requirement of x and y.






### Functions and their arguments

Functions are "canned scripts" that automate more complicated sets of commands
including operations assignments, etc. Many functions are predefined, or can be
made available by importing R *packages* (more on that later). A function
usually gets one or more inputs called *arguments*. Functions often (but not
always) return a *value*. A typical example would be the function `sqrt()`. The
input (the argument) must be a number, and the return value (in fact, the
output) is the square root of that number. Executing a function ('running it')
is called *calling* the function. An example of a function call is:


~~~
b <- sqrt(a)
~~~
{: .language-r}
Here, the value of `a` is given to the `sqrt()` function, the `sqrt()` function
calculates the square root, and returns the value which is then assigned to
the object `b`. This function is very simple, because it takes just one argument.

The return 'value' of a function need not be numerical (like that of `sqrt()`),
and it also does not need to be a single item: it can be a set of things, or
even a dataset. We'll see that when we read data files into R.

Arguments can be anything, not only numbers or filenames, but also other
objects. Exactly what each argument means differs per function, and must be
looked up in the documentation (see below). Some functions take arguments which
may either be specified by the user, or, if left out, take on a *default* value:
these are called *options*. Options are typically used to alter the way the
function operates, such as whether it ignores 'bad values', or what symbol to
use in a plot.  However, if you want something specific, you can specify a value
of your choice which will be used instead of the default.

Let's try a function that can take multiple arguments: `round()`.


~~~
round(3.14159)
~~~
{: .language-r}



~~~
[1] 3
~~~
{: .output}


Here, we've called `round()` with just one argument, `3.14159`, and it has
returned the value `3`.  That's because the default is to round to the nearest
whole number. If we want more digits we can see how to do that by getting
information about the `round` function.  We can use `args(round)` or look at the
help for this function using `?round`.


~~~
args(round)
~~~
{: .language-r}



~~~
function (x, digits = 0) 
NULL
~~~
{: .output}


~~~
?round
~~~
{: .language-r}

We see that if we want a different number of digits, we can
type `digits=2` or however many we want.


~~~
round(3.14159, digits = 2)
~~~
{: .language-r}



~~~
[1] 3.14
~~~
{: .output}

If you provide the arguments in the exact same order as they are defined you
don't have to name them:


~~~
round(3.14159, 2)
~~~
{: .language-r}



~~~
[1] 3.14
~~~
{: .output}

And if you do name the arguments, you can switch their order:


~~~
round(digits = 2, x = 3.14159)
~~~
{: .language-r}



~~~
[1] 3.14
~~~
{: .output}

It's good practice to put the non-optional arguments (like the number you're
rounding) first in your function call, and to specify the names of all optional
arguments.  If you don't, someone reading your code might have to look up the
definition of a function with unfamiliar arguments to understand what you're
doing.

> ## Exercise
>
> Type in `?round` at the console and then look at the output in the Help pane.
> What other functions exist that are similar to `round`?
> How do you use the `digits` parameter in the round function?
{: .challenge}



{% include links.md %}
