---
# Please do not edit this file directly; it is auto generated.
# Instead, please edit 04-boxplots.md in _episodes_rmd/
title: "boxplot og lineær regression (måske)"
teaching: 80
exercises: 35
questions:
  - "FIXME"
objectives:
  - "FIXME"
keypoints:
  - "FIXME"
   
source: Rmd
---

Endnu tættere blik på data - boxplots.



facetter

density curves - er der forskelle på de tre lufthavne?

Er der forskel på forsinkelser som funktion af flyenes alder?

lineær reg.




We start by loading the **`tidyverse`** package.


~~~
library(tidyverse)
~~~
{: .language-r}

If not still in the workspace, load the data we saved in the previous lesson.


~~~
Error in read_excel("../data/flightdata.xlsx"): could not find function "read_excel"
~~~
{: .error}



## Boxplots 
We can use boxplots to visualize the distribution of number of household members for each wall type:

~~~
boxplot(interviews_plotting$no_membrs~interviews_plotting$respondent_wall_type)
~~~
{: .language-r}



~~~
Error in eval(predvars, data, env): object 'interviews_plotting' not found
~~~
{: .error}
Two new things happens here. First, we are using a new way of telling the 
plot function what relationship we want to visualise. 
The function notation y~x, tells the boxplot function that we want to visualise
y as a function of x. In this case we want to visualise the number of people, as 
af function of the wall type. 
Secondly, we use a boxplot. A boxplots shows the distribution of the values on 
the y-axis. The median value is indicated by the solid bar.
The box encapsulates 50% of the observations. Its upper and lower borders 
represents the interquartile range (IQR). 
The whiskers on the plot - here only the upper whiskers are shown due to the
nature of the data, represents the range of the data. The distance from the 
upper part of the box, to the whisker is 1.5 times the interquartile range.
The dots that we see for muddaub and sunbricks are outliers. Observations that
lies so far from the rest of the observations, that we consider them as 
outliers.

Depending on the data, and the nature of the analyses we are going to do,
outliers are either very interesting, or something that we can ignore.




{% include links.md %}
